It’s hard to make a definitive judgment about Windows 11 because so much of it is still being built out in front of us. Native Android app support took too long to arrive, Widgets lack some advertised features, and during testing, I ran into annoying (but not critical) bugs in apps like Snipping Tool and Cortana. I expect Microsoft will address all of these issues in due time, which means it should be a whole different OS by the time many of us get the offer to upgrade from Windows 10.
The Windows 11 you log into on your brand-new PC will be different from the Windows 11 I used in the weeks prior to launch, and they’ll both look different than whatever Windows 10 users see when they upgrade in the future.
But so far, what’s here is pretty good. Windows 11 refines what’s good about Windows 10 without losing too much in the process, and once you learn how everything works, the new operating system is rarely any harder to use. It’s more customizable, and new tools like Desktops and Snap Assist give you more granular control over how you divide up your screen and your time.
Windows 11 is more streamlined and easier to navigate with a touchscreen, with bigger touch zones and simpler, rounder menus. In many ways, Windows 11 is more akin to competitors like macOS, Android, and Chrome than ever before — and I think that’s generally a good thing.
Most importantly, if you don’t like the changes, most of them can be safely ignored or changed back to the way you like them — even the Start button can be slid back into the lower-left corner by clicking a button in the taskbar settings. And if you don’t like the look of Windows 11, you can safely ignore it and keep using Windows 10 for years — though Microsoft will eventually expect you to upgrade.
But right now, as much as I like Windows 11, I don’t recommend you upgrade unless you’re really excited about the new tools and revamped design. There just isn’t a compelling reason to, and you’d be well-served by giving Microsoft time to address some of the bugs and build out the features a bit more. 
